Chain of Trust
--------
To trust a certificate, you have to trust its signature, which means trusting whoever signed it.  That's kind of like having a notary witness that someone signed a document.  You have to trust the notary, too.

Of course, if you watched someone sign a document, you may not really need a notary.  This is good enough for your needs.  But if you have a contract on a house, the bank will want a notary to sign and seal your signature.  That notary got their seal from a public authority...it's a chain of trust.

TLS certificates work the exact same way.  Well, almost.  Each certificate has a signature that can only be generated by an authority.  The certificate also includes the signature of the authority.  You can then get the authority's certificate and do the same verification up until some authority that you trust.

Web servers should be configured to let you download the whole chain of trust, generally just several public keys appended to each other, and when the certificate is verified during the SSL handshake, the whole chain is right there.  Sometimes servers are setup with _only_ the final certificate in the chain, since that's the bare minimum to enable HTTPS on a server.  When this happens, then things get unpredictable.  If the certificate was generated by a trusted root CA and every client to try to use it has that root CA's certificate imported in their trusted store, everything works fine because they download the server's certificate and already have the one CA's certificate imported.  Things get hairy in either of these cases:

1) The root CA's certificate isn't imported.  The client won't get it because it's not on the server and it doesn't have any idea where it would go to pull it down.
2) The root CA signed a certificate to an "intermediate" CA to allow it to generate certificates.  A lot of hosting providers get intermediate CA certificates so they can generate SSL certificates for their customers.  They will provide you with your server's certificate along with a bundle containing their intermediate CA certificate.  The web server needs to include the intermediate CA's certificate in the bundle and a client will pull them all down.

CA Certificates vs. Self-Signed
--------
CA certificates are no more "secure" than self-signed certificates.  The difference in the two is _management_.  To tell your system to trust a certificate, you need to trust its authority.  A CA certificate provides the means to delegate authority to a single certificate, meaning that instead of having to trust multiple self-signed certificates, you can just trust the certificate of the CA that signed them.

With a self-signed certificate, the certificate is its own authority, so you need to go through the process of importing each self-signed certificate into a trusted store.  By delegating the authority to a CA, you only really need to trust the CA's certififate.

If you obtain certificates from a trusted root CA, then your system may already have them installed or at least can install them with a package provided by the OS vendor.  A trusted root CA goes through stringent requirements to get their certificates included by OS vendors, like storing the private keys in a hardware security module, having regular security audits, etc.  All good stuff, but if you can install your own CA certificates, you don't really need it.

Certificate common name and DNS
--------
When you communicate with a server, you typically specify some hostname or address.  Given that there are DNS servers and caches and routers and proxies that may all be out of your control, you want to make sure you are communicating with the actual endpoint that you intended.

Suppose someone sets up a proxy server between your client and your server and they terminate SSL there, do whatever they want to your communications, then pass them on to the server?  That would be pretty unfortunate, but To do so, the proxy server needs to have a certificate from a CA that you trust that _also_ has a common name that is the endpoint you expect.  It's not enough that they present a trusted certificate if that certificate says they are someone else.

This is where the CA that signs the certificate does the work of validating ownership.  For most trusted root CA's, they have a process where they will send the requestor some information to add as a DNS record so they can validate that the requestor actually owns the DNS for which they are providing a certificate.  If you are managing your own CA and importing the CA certificates, then you'll need to do your own verification of the DNS.  In either case, this prevents someone from taking a server with a certificate from a trusted CA and turning it into a proxy for some other server.